U.S. and India Mark a New Moment in Relations as Narendra Modi Speaks to Congress

WASHINGTON — Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India condemned global terrorism and said during a lengthy address to Congress on Wednesday that growing economic ties benefit both his country and the United States.

“The innovation strength of our two countries comes together in California,” said Mr. Modi, who visited California last year. “Here, the innovative genius of America and India’s intellectual creativity are working to shape new industries of the future.”

Mr. Modi made clear that he intended the speech to hail a new moment in relations between the United States and India when he told Congress at the outset that he had started his visit to Washington with a trip to Arlington National Cemetery. He called it “the final resting place of many brave soldiers of this great land.”

“I honored their courage and sacrifice for the ideals of freedom and democracy,” Mr. Modi added.

Indian leaders have long been skeptical of American military power and have often been deeply critical of the Vietnam War and other military interventions by the United States. Celebrating American war dead, though, was a telling signal of what both sides say is a very different relationship between the two countries.

Mr. Modi has encouraged a continued American military presence in Afghanistan because he is worried that Pakistan will have unchallenged influence there once the Americans leave.

“Your contribution in keeping the region safe and secure is deeply appreciated,” Mr. Modi said, adding: “A commitment to rebuild a peaceful and stable and prosperous Afghanistan is our shared objective.”

Almost exactly 31 years ago, Rajiv Gandhi, then India’s prime minister, also spoke of Afghanistan in an address to Congress. But he did it in the context of justifying the Soviet military presence there because, he said, Soviet troops were “invited by the Karmal regime,” a reference to the Soviet-installed government of President Babrak Karmal.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


LIVE COVERAGE
Live Updates: Narendra Modi Addresses Joint Session of Congress JUNE 8, 2016

Narendra Modi Bolsters India’s Ties With U.S., Thanks (Partly) to Donald Trump JUNE 7, 2016

Narendra Modi, Indian Premier, Courts Silicon Valley to Try to Ease Nation’s Poverty SEPT. 27, 2015
The different references to Afghanistan are a measure of just how much relations between the world’s largest democracies have changed in three decades.

In another sign of a break with the past, Mr. Modi gave a strong endorsement for global institutions, most of them created with American leadership.

“Growing uncertainties and political complexities — our engagement can make a difference by promoting cooperation, not dominance,” Mr. Modi said. “Connectivity, not isolation. Inclusive, not exclusive mechanism. Respect for global commons and, above all, for international rules and norms.”

Then Mr. Modi made an explicit reference to China by endorsing the “freedom of navigation on seas,” referring to disputes involving the South China Sea and China’s efforts to carve out part of those waters as its own.

Mr. Modi was the fifth Indian prime minister to address Congress, and the appearance represents a turnaround in his acceptance within the United States. For years Mr. Modi was barred from getting a visa to come here because of his role in 2002 riots in the Indian state of Gujarat that cost the lives of more than 1,000 people, mostly Muslims. But as he rose as a national political figure in India, United States diplomats sought to put that difficult history to rest.

Mr. Modi’s decision to accelerate already-warming ties with the United States has been greeted in Washington with excitement and surprise.